Variable transformations (#582)
TuringLang/docs: developers/transforms/distributions/index.qmd

- some calculus (the chain and product rules for differentiation, and changes of variables in integrals).

```{julia}
import Random
Random.seed!(468);

using Distributions: Normal, LogNormal, logpdf, Distributions
using Plots: histogram
```

## Sampling from a distribution

To sample from a distribution (as defined in [Distributions.jl](https://juliastats.org/Distributions.jl/)), we can use the `rand` function.
Let's sample from a normal distribution and then plot a histogram of the samples.

```{julia}
samples = rand(Normal(), 5000)
histogram(samples, bins=50)
```

(Calling `Normal()` without any arguments, as we do here, gives us a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.)
If you want to know the probability of observing any of the samples, you can use `logpdf`:

```{julia}
println("sample: $(samples[1])")
println("logpdf: $(logpdf(Normal(), samples[1]))")
```

The probability density function for the normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1 is

$$p(x) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}} \exp{\left(-\frac{x^2}{2}\right)},$$

so we could also have calculated this manually using:

```{julia}

> log(1 / sqrt(2π) * exp(-samples[1]^2 / 2))

Reviewer: I know you've just got this here as an example, but would you be up for adding a footnote that warns people against computing the logpdf in this way? i.e. they really ought to simplify the expression first to avoid ever exponentiating -x^2/2

Reviewer: I like this!

println("Actual   : $(naive_logpdf(MyLogNormal(), samples_lognormal[1]))")
```

Clearly this approach is not quite correct!

## The derivative

The reason why this doesn't work is because transforming a (continuous) distribution causes probability density to be stretched and otherwise moved around.
For example, in the normal distribution, half of the probability density is between $-\infty$ and $0$, and half is between $0$ and $\infty$.
When exponentiated (i.e. in the log-normal distribution), the first half of the density is mapped to the interval $(0, 1)$, and the second half to $(1, \infty)$.

This 'explanation' on its own does not really mean much, though.
A perhaps more useful approach is to not talk about _probability densities_, but instead to make it more concrete by relating them to actual _probabilities_.
If we think about the normal distribution as a continuous curve, what the probability density function $p(x)$ really tells us is that: for any two points $a$ and $b$ (where $a \leq b$), the probability of drawing a sample between $a$ and $b$ is the corresponding area under the curve, i.e.

$$\int_a^b p(x) \, \mathrm{d}x.$$

> For example, if $(a, b) = (-\infty, \infty)$, then the probability of drawing a sample from the entire distribution is 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if $(a, b) = (-\infty, \infty)$, then the probability of drawing a sample between $a$ and $b$ is 1.
```
grammar suggestion. Feel free to ignore if you don't like.

We have that:

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}y}{\mathrm{d}x} = \exp(x) = y \implies \mathrm{d}x = \frac{1}{y}\,\mathrm{d}y$$

and so

$$\int_{x=a}^{x=b} p(x) \, \mathrm{d}x
  = \int_{y=\exp(a)}^{y=\exp(b)} p(\log(y)) \frac{1}{y} \,\mathrm{d}y
  = \int_{\exp(a)}^{\exp(b)} q(y) \, \mathrm{d}y,
$$

from which we can read off $q(y) = p(\log(y)) / y$.

In contrast, when we implemented `naive_logpdf`

```{julia}
naive_logpdf(d::MyLogNormal, y) = logpdf(Normal(d.μ, d.σ), log(y))
```

that was the equivalent of saying that $q(y) = p(\log(y))$.
We left out a factor of $1/y$!

Indeed, now we can define the correct `logpdf` function.
Since everything is a logarithm here, instead of multiplying by $1/y$ we subtract $\log(y)$:

```{julia}
Distributions.logpdf(d::MyLogNormal, y) = logpdf(Normal(d.μ, d.σ), log(y)) - log(y)
```

and check that it works:

```{julia}
println("Sample   : $(samples_lognormal[1])")
println("Expected : $(logpdf(LogNormal(), samples_lognormal[1]))")
println("Actual   : $(logpdf(MyLogNormal(), samples_lognormal[1]))")
```

> The same process can be applied to _any_ kind of transformation.

Reviewer: Would you be open to restricting this a little? i.e. this doesn't work for non-invertible transformations.

How can we show that this is the case?

There are many ways to work out the required calculus.
Some are more elegant and some rather less so!
One of the less headache-inducing ways is to define the intermediate variables:

$$r = \sqrt{-2 \log(x_1)}; \quad \theta = 2\pi x_2,$$

from which we can see that $y_1 = r\cos\theta$ and $y_2 = r\sin\theta$, and hence

$$\begin{align}
x_1 &= \exp{\left(-\frac{r^2}{2}\right)} = \exp{\left(-\frac{y_1^2}{2}\right)}\exp{\left(-\frac{y_2^2}{2}\right)}; \\
x_2 &= \frac{\theta}{2\pi} = \frac{1}{2\pi} \, \arctan\left(\frac{y_2}{y_1}\right).
\end{align}$$

This lets us obtain the requisite partial derivatives in a way that doesn't involve _too_ much algebra.
As an example, we have

$$\frac{\partial x_1}{\partial y_1} = -y_1 \exp{\left(-\frac{y_1^2}{2}\right)}\exp{\left(-\frac{y_2^2}{2}\right)} = -y_1 x_1,$$

(where we used the product rule), and

$$\frac{\partial x_2}{\partial y_1} = \frac{1}{2\pi} \left(\frac{1}{1 + (y_2/y_1)^2}\right) \left(-\frac{y_2}{y_1^2}\right),$$

(where we used the chain rule, and the derivative $\mathrm{d}(\arctan(a))/\mathrm{d}a = 1/(1 + a^2)$).

Putting together the Jacobian matrix, we have:

> $$\mathcal{J} = \begin{pmatrix}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$\mathbfl{J} = \begin{pmatrix}
```
for consistency with the previous section

-y_1 x_1 & -y_2 x_1 \\
-cy_2/y_1^2 & c/y_1 \\
\end{pmatrix},$$

where $c = [2\pi(1 + (y_2/y_1)^2)]^{-1}$.
The determinant of this matrix is

$$\begin{align}

> \det(\mathcal{J}) &= -cx_1 - cx_1(y_2/y_1)^2 \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\det(\mathbf{J}) &= -cx_1 - cx_1(y_2/y_1)^2 \\
```
same again

&= -cx_1\left[1 + \left(\frac{y_2}{y_1}\right)^2\right] \\
&= -\frac{1}{2\pi} x_1 \\
&= -\frac{1}{2\pi}\exp{\left(-\frac{y_1^2}{2}\right)}\exp{\left(-\frac{y_2^2}{2}\right)},
\end{align}$$

Coming right back to our probability density, we have that

$$\begin{align}

> q(y_1, y_2) &= p(x_1, x_2) \cdot |\det(\mathcal{J})| \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
q(y_1, y_2) &= p(x_1, x_2) \cdot |\det(\mathbf{J})| \\
```
same as before
